docs: Add ADR for resource attributes enrichment for non-workload metrics (#1409)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/arch/013-resource-attributes-enrichment-for-non-workload-metrics.md

This is very useful for workload metrics (like Pod and container metrics). However, for non-workload metrics (like Node metrics), the metrics will be incorrectly associated with Metric Agent Pod, because the Metric Agent Pod is the one that emits these metrics.

For example, in the following diagram, the `k8s.node.cpu.usage`metric is incorrectly associated with the `telemetry-metric-agent-4ncx9` Pod. This creates confusion, because the user might incorrectly think that this metric provides the Node CPU consumed by the `telemetry-metric-agent-4ncx9` Pod. While in reality, it provides the entire Node CPU usage.
In addition, the metrics from the system namespaces (including `kyma-system` namespace) are excluded by default. Thus, this metric is dropped by default even if the user enables the collection of Node metrics.

![Node Metric With k8sattributes Processor](../assets/node-metric-with-k8sattributes-processor.png)

Therefore, we need to ensure that non-workload metrics are not enriched with unwanted resource attributes.

> ## Decision

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Possible Solutions
```

Then, we can delete all the resource attributes with dummy values in the metric gateway.

- _Pros_:
  - If someone inspects the metrics emitted by the Metric Agent, it will be clear that the resource attributes with the dummy values are not desired.
- _Cons_: 
  - If a user sends their own custom non-workload metrics, there is no option for them to skip the unwanted resource attributes.

### Option 3: Directly Deleting Unwanted Resource Attributes

We can directly delete the unwanted resource attributes in the metric gateway after they have been incorrectly enriched by the k8sattributes processor.

- _Pros_:
  - Simplest solution, because we will just need to add a single processor in the existing setup for deleting the unwanted resource attributes.
- _Cons_:
  - If a user sends their own custom non-workload metrics, there is no option for them to skip the unwanted resource attributes.
  - If a user deploys their own OTel Collector and sends metrics to the metric gateway, they might be explicitly setting the resource attributes that we are deleting with custom values.

> We have decided to adopt option 1. Although the metric gateway configuration will become more complex, it is the cleanest and recommended solution for doing a conditional routing in an OTel collector pipeline and the only solution which allows users to skip enriching their custom non-workload metrics with unwanted resource attributes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Decision

We have decided to adopt option 1. Although the metric gateway configuration will become more complex, it is the cleanest and recommended solution for doing a conditional routing in an OTel collector pipeline and the only solution which allows users to skip enriching their custom non-workload metrics with unwanted resource attributes.
```

Reviewer: Just do make the actual decision more visible

> # 2. Resource Attributes enrichment for non-workload metrics

Author: Probably this comment was added before I capitalised the title, right?
Let me know if something is missing in the title style

> # 2. Resource Attributes enrichment for non-workload metrics

Reviewer 2: Yes it was :) Excellent!

For example, in the diagram shown below, the `k8s.node.cpu.usage`metric is incorrectly associated with the `telemetry-metric-agent-4ncx9` pod. This creates confusion, as the user might incorrectly think that this metric provides the node CPU consumed by the `telemetry-metric-agent-4ncx9` pod. While in reality, it provides the entire node CPU usage.
In addition, the metrics from the system namespaces (including `kyma-system` namespace) are excluded by default. Thus, this metric will be dropped by default even if the user enables the collection of node metrics.

![Node Metric With k8sattributes Processor](../assets/node-metric-with-k8sattributes-processor.png)

## Decision

There are different possible solutions to solve this problem:

**Option 1: Using connectors**

![Connectors](../assets/connectors.drawio.svg)

We can split our MetricPipeline into 3 sub-pipelines which are connected together using [Connectors](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/building/connector/) as shown in the diagram above.
A `Receiver Pipeline` which contains the receivers components.
A `k8sattribute Processor` which contains only the k8sattributes processor.

> A `Processor + Exporter Pipeline` which contains the rest of the processors and the exporters. The metrics will be routed to the `k8sattribute Processor` only if they are workload metrics.

Author: I would prefer to keep the `k8sattribute Processor Pipeline` capitalized, because it represents the entity in the diagram

> Otherwise, the metrics will bypass the `k8sattribute Processor` and will be routed directly to the `Processor + Exporter Pipeline`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Otherwise, the metrics will bypass the `k8sattribute processor` and will be routed directly to the `Processor + Exporter Pipeline`.
```

Author: I would prefer to keep the `k8sattribute Processor Pipeline` capitalized, because it represents the entity in the diagram

- <em>Pro</em>: Clean solution. The non-workload metrics will never have the unwanted resource attributes set to any value.
- <em>Con</em>: Complex setup.

**Option 2: Setting unwanted resource attributes with dummy values**

We can explicitly set the unwanted resource attributes with dummy values for non-workload metrics in the Metric Agent.
Then, we can delete all the resource attributes with dummy values in the Metric Gateway.

- <em>Pro</em>: If someone inspects the metrics emitted by the Metric Agent, it will be clear that the resource attributes with the dummy values are not desired.
- <em>Con</em>: If a user deploys his own OTel Collector and sends metrics to the Metric Gateway, then the unwanted resource attributes will not be deleted, as they will not have the dummy values.

> **Option 3: Directly deleting unwanted resource attributes**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Option 3: Directly Deleting unwanted Resource Attributes
```

We can directly delete the unwanted resource attributes in the Metric Agent after they have been incorrectly enriched by the k8sattributes processor.

> - <em>Pro</em>: Simplest solution

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- _Pro_: Simplest solution.
```

> - <em>Con</em>: If a user deploys his own OTel Collector and sends metrics to the Metric Gateway, he/she might be explicitly setting the resource attributes that we are deleting with custom values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- _Con_: If a user deploys their own OTel Collector and sends metrics to the Metric Gateway, they might be explicitly setting the resource attributes that we are deleting with custom values.
```

> We have decided to adopt option 3 because it is the simplest solution and the probability that a customer deploys his own OTel Collector, sends metrics to the Metric Gateway and sets the resource attributes that we are deleting with custom values is low.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have decided to adopt option 3 because it is the simplest solution and the probability that a customer deploys their own OTel Collector, sends metrics to the Metric Gateway, and sets the resource attributes that we are deleting with custom values is low.
```

In addition, the metrics from the system namespaces (including `kyma-system` namespace) are excluded by default. Thus, this metric is dropped by default even if the user enables the collection of Node metrics.

![Node Metric With k8sattributes Processor](../assets/node-metric-with-k8sattributes-processor.png)

## Decision

There are different possible solutions to solve this problem:

### Option 1: Using Connectors

![Connectors](../assets/connectors.drawio.svg)

We can split our MetricPipeline into 3 sub-pipelines which are connected using [Connectors](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/building/connector/) as shown in the diagram above.
A `Receiver Pipeline`, which contains the receivers components.
A `k8sattribute Processor Pipeline` which contains only the k8sattributes processor.
A `Processor + Exporter Pipeline` which contains the rest of the processors and the exporters. The metrics will be routed to the `k8sattribute Processor Pipeline` only if they are workload metrics.
Otherwise, the metrics will bypass the `k8sattribute Processor Pipeline` and will be routed directly to the `Processor + Exporter Pipeline`.

> - _Pro_: Clean solution. The non-workload metrics will never have the unwanted resource attributes set to any value.

Reviewer 3: It is not only cleaner, but also the recommended solution for doing a conditional routing on an otel-collector pipeline.

> - _Con_: Complex setup.

Reviewer 3: Per MetricPIpeline entity we will have 3 pipelines in the collector instead of 1. The set of processors is probably the same, so we will have a more complex setup of the pipeline definitions in combination with the new connector definitions. Additionally, operation will get more challenging as in the metrics you cannot map directly a collector pipeline to a MetricPipeline.

### Option 2: Setting Unwanted Resource Attributes With Dummy Values

We can explicitly set the unwanted resource attributes with dummy values for non-workload metrics in the Metric Agent.
Then, we can delete all the resource attributes with dummy values in the Metric Gateway.

- _Pro_: If someone inspects the metrics emitted by the Metric Agent, it will be clear that the resource attributes with the dummy values are not desired.
- <em>Con</em>: If a user deploys his own OTel Collector and sends metrics to the Metric Gateway, then the unwanted resource attributes will not be deleted, as they will not have the dummy values.

### Option 3: Directly Deleting unwanted Resource Attributes

We can directly delete the unwanted resource attributes in the Metric Gateway after they have been incorrectly enriched by the k8sattributes processor.

> - _Pro_: Simplest solution.

Reviewer 3: Why is it simple, it is not a good argument without facts. Is is simple as we add just a single processor in the existing setup.

> - _Con_: If a user deploys their own OTel Collector and sends metrics to the Metric Gateway, they might be explicitly setting the resource attributes that we are deleting with custom values.

Reviewer 3: We will guess out of the metric name that it is a non-workload metric AND we guess that it is for example about nodes and that's why we do not delte the node attributes. That are two assumption which might be not applicable by self-emmitted metrics.
If that turns out to become a problem, we could introduce a contract of that you can add a resource attribute to disable enrichement explicitly where you even can specify which resource type the metric is about, so converting the guessing from name to an explicit setting: `io.kyma-project.telemetry/kubernetes-kind: node`

</div>

- _Pros_: 
  - Clean solution. The non-workload metrics will never have the unwanted resource attributes set to any value.
  - This is the recommended solution for doing a conditional routing in an OTel collector pipeline.
- _Cons_:
  - Per MetricPipeline, we will have 3 pipelines in the collector instead of 1. So, we will have a more complex setup of the pipeline definitions in combination with the new connector definitions.

### Option 2: Setting Unwanted Resource Attributes With Dummy Values

We can explicitly set the unwanted resource attributes with dummy values for non-workload metrics in the Metric Agent.
Then, we can delete all the resource attributes with dummy values in the Metric Gateway.

- _Pros_:
  - If someone inspects the metrics emitted by the Metric Agent, it will be clear that the resource attributes with the dummy values are not desired.
- _Cons_: 
  - If a user deploys their own OTel Collector and sends metrics to the Metric Gateway, then the unwanted resource attributes will not be deleted, because they will not have the dummy values.

> ### Option 3: Directly Deleting unwanted Resource Attributes

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Option 3: Directly Deleting Unwanted Resource Attributes
```

![Connectors](../assets/connectors.drawio.svg)

We can split our MetricPipeline into 3 sub-pipelines which are connected using [Connectors](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/configuration/#connectors) as shown in the diagram above.
The `Input Pipeline` contains the `otlp` receiver and `memory_limiter` processor.
The `Attributes Enrichment Pipeline` contains the `k8sattributes` and `transform/resolve-service-name` processors.
The `Output Pipeline` contains the rest of the processors and the `otlp` exporter.

> If the resource attribute `skip-enrichment` is set `true`, the `Routing Connector` will route the metrics to the `Output Pipeline` directly. Otherwise, the `Routing Connector` will route the metrics to the `Attributes Enrichment Pipeline`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the resource attribute `skip-enrichment` is set to `true`, the `Routing Connector` will route the metrics to the `Output Pipeline` directly. Otherwise, the `Routing Connector` will route the metrics to the `Attributes Enrichment Pipeline`.
```

An `Attributes Enrichment Pipeline`, which contains the `k8sattributes` and `transform/resolve-service-name` processors.
An `Output Pipeline`, which contains the rest of the processors and the `otlp` exporter.

> The metrics will be routed to the `Attributes Enrichment Pipeline` only if they are workload metrics. This can be done by checking if a resource attribute (like `skip-enrichment`) is set `true`.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what this means.

```suggestion
The metrics will be routed to the `Attributes Enrichment Pipeline` only if they are workload metrics. To set up the routing, check if a resource attribute (like `skip-enrichment`) is set `true`.
```

or 

```suggestion
The metrics will be routed to the `Attributes Enrichment Pipeline` only if they are workload metrics. To check whether they are workload metrics, check if a resource attribute (like `skip-enrichment`) is set `true`.
```

Basically, what is the "this" that "can be done" (by whom)?

Author: "this" refers to the conditional routing
It is done by the routing connector

Author: I changed the structure of the sentence. Can you have another look?

Otherwise, the metrics will bypass the `Attributes Enrichment Pipeline` and will be routed directly to the `Output Pipeline`.

> To check the effect of the new setup on the performance of the Metric Gateway, [load tests](https://github.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/tree/main/docs/contributor/benchmarks#metric-gateway) were executed using the image `europe-docker.pkg.dev/kyma-project/dev/kyma-otel-collector:PR-121`, which contains the `routingconnector` and `forwardconnector` components:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To check the effect of the new setup on the performance of the metric gateway, [load tests](https://github.com/kyma-project/telemetry-manager/tree/main/docs/contributor/benchmarks#metric-gateway) were executed using the image `europe-docker.pkg.dev/kyma-project/dev/kyma-otel-collector:PR-121`, which contains the `routingconnector` and `forwardconnector` components:
```

The metrics will be routed to the `Attributes Enrichment Pipeline` only if they are workload metrics.
Otherwise, the metrics will bypass the `Attributes Enrichment Pipeline` and will be routed directly to the `Output Pipeline`.

> Load test using `europe-docker.pkg.dev/kyma-project/dev/kyma-otel-collector:PR-121` image which contains the `routingconnector` and `forwardconnector` components:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Load test using the image `europe-docker.pkg.dev/kyma-project/dev/kyma-otel-collector:PR-121`, which contains the `routingconnector` and `forwardconnector` components:
```

|                   1. With Connectors |             4459             |             4461             |          0          |       172, 153       |   1.5, 1.5    |
|                   2. With Connectors |             4476             |             4479             |          0          |       167, 138       |   1.5, 1.5    |
|                   3. With Connectors |             4471             |             4471             |          0          |       157, 163       |   1.5, 1.5    |

</div>

- _Pros_: 
  - Clean solution. The non-workload metrics will never have the unwanted resource attributes set to any value.
  - This is the recommended solution for doing a conditional routing in an OTel collector pipeline.
  - If a user sends their own custom non-workload metrics, they can skip enriching their custom non-workload metrics with unwanted resource attributes by setting a resource attribute (like `skip-enrichment`) to `true`. This will be documented for the users, so that they would be aware of the possibility of skipping the resource attributes enrichment.
- _Cons_:

>   - Per MetricPipeline, we will have 3 pipelines in the collector instead of 1. So, we will have a more complex setup of the pipeline service definitions in combination with the new connectors definitions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Per MetricPipeline, we will have three pipelines in the collector instead of one. So, we will have a more complex setup of the pipeline service definitions in combination with the new connectors definitions.
```

  - Clean solution. The non-workload metrics will never have the unwanted resource attributes set to any value.
  - This is the recommended solution for doing a conditional routing in an OTel collector pipeline.
- _Cons_:

>   - Per MetricPipeline, we will have 3 pipelines in the collector instead of 1. So, we will have a more complex setup of the pipeline definitions in combination with the new connectors definitions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - Per MetricPipeline, we will have 3 pipelines in the collector instead of 1. So, we will have a more complex setup of the pipeline definitions in combination with the new connector's definitions.
```
I'm guessing this is genitive? Plural sounds weird to me

Author: we have 2 connectors. So, it should be plural

Author: I changed the structure of the sentence. Can you have another look?

- _Pros_:
  - Simplest solution, because we will just need to add a single processor in the existing setup for deleting the unwanted resource attributes.
- _Cons_:
  - If a user sends their own custom non-workload metrics, there is no option for them to skip the unwanted resource attributes.

>   - If a user deploys their own OTel Collector and sends metrics to the Metric Gateway, they might be explicitly setting the resource attributes that we are deleting with custom values.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - If a user deploys their own OTel Collector and sends metrics to the metric gateway, they might be explicitly setting the resource attributes that we are deleting with custom values.
```

> We have decided to adopt option 1. Although the Metric Gateway configuration will become more complex, it is the cleanest and recommended solution for doing a conditional routing in an OTel collector pipeline and the only solution which allows users to skip enriching their custom non-workload metrics with unwanted resource attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have decided to adopt option 1. Although the metric gateway configuration will become more complex, it is the cleanest and recommended solution for doing a conditional routing in an OTel collector pipeline and the only solution which allows users to skip enriching their custom non-workload metrics with unwanted resource attributes.
```
